Always rely on plots for assumptions

shapiro and qq plot for normality.

Bartlett and levene for variance.

One sample data: normality, if it's normal distribution use t-test (student) with mu, if not use Wilcoxon test with mu.

Two sample data: normality, variance if both samples are normal use bartlett else levene and if p-value is higher than 0.05 then t-test (student/Welch) with var.equal=TRUE, else Wilcoxon (aka Mann-Whitney) test with alternative = "two.sided".

Paired sample data: normality (the differences should be compared), no need to do bartlett or levene variance, if normal use t-test (student) with paired=TRUE, [NOT ELSE CHECK AGAIN] Wilcoxon test alternative = "two.sided" + paired = TRUE.

ANOVA: normality [using lm, residuals, then shapiro function. Or better, use ggResidpanel library resid_panel function(lm, plots = c("resid", "qq", "ls", "cookd"),smoother = TRUE)], variance if both samples are normal use bartlett else levene and if p-value is higher than 0.05 then ANOVA [anova(lm)], else ANOVA Welch with var.equal = FALSE.
If normality is not good yet variance is significant, use Kruskal-Wallis.
ANOVA gives us a big picture and does not tell us how each group differs from each other. We use Tukey [tukey_hsd(lm)] to get it but we can only use it after initial ANOVA rejected the null hypothesis (meaning at least one group mean is different).

Kruskal-Wallis: Same normality and variance process, use kruskal.test and use Dunn’s test (equivalent of Tukey’s) to get the comparisons.

Linear regression with grouped data: 1 continuous response, one or more predictors, with at least one continuous predictor (and possibly categorical group variables).
Two-way ANOVA: 1 continuous response, 2 categorical predictors.

If the difference between two AIC scores is greater than 2, then the model with the smallest AIC score is more supported than the model with the higher AIC score.
If the difference between the two models’ AIC scores is less than 2 then both models are equally well supported.